# Auth^2 with Rails, Part 2

In the last blog post, I reviewed how we can use a Rails backend with the bcrypt gem to create secure password storage when users sign up. In this post, we'll talk about how we can both persist login information and later authorize a user for certain paths and actions by storing a user's information in browser localStorage using JSON Web Tokens (JWT).

## Create a Route and Controller

The first step to logging a user in is creating the routes and logic on the backend to check if the user exists, and if their password is correct. To make this as secure as possible, we want all of our login requests to be **POST** requests, not GET requests. In our `./config/routes.rb` file we need to create a new route for our users to log in.

As you can see, we will also need to make a controller called `authentication` with a `login` route. To do this we'll simply run `rails g controller authentication` and then open up that file. Inside our new authentication file we're going to need to check several things before confirming a user's account and logging them in. First, we need to see if the user even exists by using `User.find_by()` to check the `:username` against what was sent in the login request (`params[:username]`). If there's no user, we'll send back an error message along with an unauthorized http status.

If there is a user with that username, next we want to check the password they sent over. The bcrypt gem gives us a simple, built-in way to do so - `@user.authenticate(params[:password])`. This has bcrypt take the password sent by the user(`params[:password]`), hash it like when it was stored, and compare the current hash with the saved hash. If the two hashes match, we know the password was correct. If they dont, we will again send back an error message with an unauthorized http status.

Once we've confirmed that the user entered the correct password, we're going to send the user a JSON Web Token (or JWT - pronounced jawt) with whatever data we want them to have. This is going to require another gem in our Rails app - jwt, so run `bundle add jwt` and install it. This lets us create a token using `JWT.encode(payload, secret)`, which takes whatever data we want to send (the payload) and hashes it along with some other identifying information, using a "secret." The secret is just a 256 bit key which can be a random string of your own, or (more securely) you can use Rails' built-in `application.secret_key_base`, which is randomly generated when you create the Rails app.

Because we will generally use a user's id to find them in the database, that's what we've included in the payload. If you also wanted to include some other information, you could certainly do so, but we won't be decoding the token on the frontend. Just think of the information we send here as being used for identification purposes. Finally, when a user has successfully logged in, we will send them their token to be used on the front end. In order to use this on the frontend, we simply have to save the token to localStorage as shown below (assuming you are using a javascript-based front end):